---
layout: post
title: "Dell XPS 15"
date: 2015-03-28 10:48
comments: true
categories: 
---
# Getting Ubuntu 15.04 set up on a Dell XPS 15 (9530)

## HiDPI

The Dell XPS 15 has a gorgeous screen, 15", 3200x1800.  This means that things can appear very small.  Here are the things I did to make it usable.

* the [display settings have a scaling slider](http://askubuntu.com/a/462023/150) - from 1.5 to 2 should work OK.
* firefox - you need to open `about:config` and change the value of `layout.css.devPixelsPerPx` to between 1.5 and 2.
* chrome - todo

Then there are the parts outside of the X display - grub and the console, which I like to be usable:

### grub

Stealing from [the testing goat HiDPI post](http://www.obeythetestinggoat.com/ot-hidpi-on-ubuntu-with-a-samsung-ativ-9.html):

> You'll have noticed that the GRUB boot menu is in a ridiculously small font because of all our teeny-tiny pixels. Fix it by generating a new font in 30-point:
> 
>     sudo grub-mkfont -s 30 -o /boot/grub/DejaVuSansMono.pf2 /usr/share/fonts/truetype/dejavu/DejaVuSansMono.ttf
> 
> DejaVu works well because it has all the glyphs for the line art, others may not work so well.
> 
> Edit `/etc/default/grub` and add a line saying `GRUB_FONT=/boot/grub/DejaVuSansMono.pf2`, and run `update-grub` to commit.

### TTY console

Stealing more from [the testing goat HiDPI post](http://www.obeythetestinggoat.com/ot-hidpi-on-ubuntu-with-a-samsung-ativ-9.html):

> One final thing that's pretty much unusable out of the box are the TTY consoles you get from pressing, eg, CTRL+ALT+F1. To change their font, you'll want to do a:
> 
>     sudo dpkg-reconfigure console-setup
> 
> I picked the VGA font in 32x16, and it looks fine, if somewhat retro.

## Touchpad Middle Button

The touchpad worked pretty well out of the box.  Two finger scrolling was smooth, but ...

I really like using the middle button in Linux, for pasting selected text, opening links in a new browser tab, closing browser tabs ...  But I couldn't find a way to make it work.  Various people mentioned that the top right corner of the touchpad/clickpad should work, but it didn't for me.  Eventually I worked out how to do it with synclient.  First I had to look up all the sizes of stuff.  It's a long list, but here are the relevant results:

    $ synclient -l
    Parameter settings:
        LeftEdge                = 1765
        RightEdge               = 5367
        TopEdge                 = 1634
        BottomEdge              = 4420
    # lots of stuff
        RightButtonAreaLeft     = 3566
        RightButtonAreaRight    = 0
        RightButtonAreaTop      = 4063
        RightButtonAreaBottom   = 0
        MiddleButtonAreaLeft    = 0
        MiddleButtonAreaRight   = 0
        MiddleButtonAreaTop     = 0
        MiddleButtonAreaBottom  = 0

And realised I might be able to set the `MiddleButtonArea*` settings, and it did indeed work.  I created a file, `~/bin/touchpad_settings.sh` with the following contents:

    #!/bin/sh
    # set up the top right corner as middle button
    synclient MiddleButtonAreaBottom=2000
    synclient MiddleButtonAreaLeft=3566

Then in the shell:

    $ chmod +x ~/bin/touchpad_settings.sh
    $ gsettings set org.gnome.settings-daemon.peripherals.input-devices hotplug-command "/home/hamish/bin/touchpad_settings.sh"

The second command means that it should be [re-applied on boot and when waking from sleep](http://askubuntu.com/a/156545).

## Swapping Caps Lock and Escape

The easy way of doing this through the standard keyboard settings has been removed, sadly.  So I installed `gnome-tweak-tool` and found the settings in there.  [See screenshots of keyboard settings]().
